
Working with tables
===================

PowerPoint allows text and numbers to be presented in tabular form (aligned
rows and columns) in a reasonably flexible way. A PowerPoint table is not
nearly as functional as an Excel spreadsheet, and is definitely less powerful
than a table in Microsoft Word, but it serves well for most presentation
purposes.


Concepts
--------

There are a few terms worth reviewing as a basis for understanding PowerPoint
tables:

table
  A table is a matrix of cells arranged in aligned rows and columns. This
  orderly arrangement allows a reader to more easily make sense of relatively
  large number of individual items. It is commonly used for displaying
  numbers, but can also be used for blocks of text.

  .. image:: /_static/img/table-01.png
     :scale: 75%

cell
  An individual content "container" within a table. A cell has a text-frame
  in which it holds that content. A PowerPoint table cell can only contain
  text. I cannot hold images, other shapes, or other tables.

  A cell has a background fill, borders, margins, and several other
  formatting settings that can be customized on a cell-by-cell basis.

row
  A side-by-side sequence of cells running across the table, all sharing the
  same top and bottom boundary.

column
  A vertical sequence of cells spanning the height of the table, all sharing
  the same left and right boundary.

table grid, also cell grid
  The underlying cells in a PowerPoint table are strictly regular. In
  a three-by-three table there are nine grid cells, three in each row and
  three in each column. The presence of merged cells can obscure portions of
  the cell grid, but not change the number of cells in the grid. Access to
  a table cell in |pp| is always via that cell's coordinates in the cell
  grid, which may not conform to its visual location (or lack thereof) in the
  table.

merged cell
  A cell can be "merged" with adjacent cells, horizontally, vertically, or
  both, causing the resulting cell to look and behave like a single cell that
  spans the area formerly occupied by those individual cells.

  .. image:: /_static/img/table-02.png
     :scale: 75%

merge-origin cell
  The top-left grid-cell in a merged cell has certain special behaviors. The
  content of that cell is what appears on the slide; content of any "spanned"
  cells is hidden. In |pp| a merge-origin cell can be identified with the
  :attr:`._Cell.is_merge_origin` property. Such a cell can report the size of
  the merged cell with its :attr:`.span_height` and :attr:`.span_width`
  properties, and can be "unmerged" back to its underlying grid cells using
  its :meth:`.split` method.

spanned-cell
  A grid-cell other than the merge-origin cell that is "occupied" by a merged
  cell is called a *spanned cell*. Intuitively, the merge-origin cell "spans"
  the other grid cells within its area. A spanned cell can be identified with
  its :attr:`._Cell.is_spanned` property. A merge-origin cell is not itself
  a spanned cell.


Adding a table
--------------

The following code adds a 3-by-3 table in a new presentation::

    >>> from pptx import Presentation
    >>> from pptx.util import Inches

    >>> # ---create presentation with 1 slide---
    >>> prs = Presentation()
    >>> slide = prs.slides.add_slide(prs.slide_layouts[5])

    >>> # ---add table to slide---
    >>> x, y, cx, cy = Inches(2), Inches(2), Inches(4), Inches(1.5)
    >>> shape = slide.shapes.add_table(3, 3, x, y, cx, cy)

    >>> shape
    <pptx.shapes.graphfrm.GraphicFrame object at 0x1022816d0>
    >>> shape.has_table
    True
    >>> table = shape.table
    >>> table
    <pptx.table.Table object at 0x1096f8d90>

.. image:: /_static/img/table-03.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 60%

A couple things to note:

* :meth:`.SlideShapes.add_table` returns a shape that contains the table, not
  the table itself. In PowerPoint, a table is contained in a graphic-frame
  shape, as is a chart or SmartArt. You can determine whether a shape
  contains a table using its :attr:`~.BaseShape.has_table` property and you
  access the table object using the shape's :attr:`~.GraphicFrame.table`
  property.


Inserting a table into a table placeholder
------------------------------------------

A placeholder allows you to specify the position and size of a shape as part
of the presentation "template", and to place a shape of your choosing into
that placeholder when authoring a presentation based on that template. This
can lead to a better looking presentation, with objects appearing in
a consistent location from slide-to-slide.

Placeholders come in different types, one of which is a *table placeholder*.
A table placeholder behaves like other placeholders except it can only accept
insertion of a table. Other placeholder types accept text bullets or charts.

There is a subtle distinction between a *layout placeholder* and a *slide
placeholder*. A layout placeholder appears in a slide layout, and defines the
position and size of the placeholder "cloned" from it onto each slide created
with that layout. As long as you don't adjust the position or size of the
slide placeholder, it will inherit it's position and size from the layout
placeholder it derives from.

To insert a table into a table placeholder, you need a slide layout that
includes a table placeholder, and you need to create a slide using that
layout. These examples assume that the third slide layout in `template.pptx`
includes a table placeholder::

    >>> prs = Presentation('template.pptx')
    >>> slide = prs.slides.add_slide(prs.slide_layouts[2])

*Accessing the table placeholder.* Generally, the easiest way to access
a placeholder shape is to know its position in the `slide.shapes` collection.
If you always use the same template, it will always show up in the same
position::

    >>> table_placeholder = slide.shapes[1]

*Inserting a table.* A table is inserted into the placeholder by calling its
:meth:`~.TablePlaceholder.insert_table` method and providing the desired
number of rows and columns::

    >>> shape = table_placeholder.insert_table(rows=3, cols=4)

The return value is a |GraphicFrame| shape containing the new table, not the
table object itself. Use the :attr:`~.GraphicFrame.table` property of that
shape to access the table object::

    >>> table = shape.table

The containing shape controls the position and size. Everything else, like
accessing cells and their contents, is done from the table object.


Accessing a cell
----------------

All content in a table is in a cell, so getting a reference to one of those
is a good place to start::

    >>> cell = table.cell(0, 0)
    >>> cell.text
    ''
    >>> cell.text = 'Unladen Swallow'

.. image:: /_static/img/table-04.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 60%

The cell is specified by its row, column coordinates as zero-based offsets.
The top-left cell is at row, column (0, 0).

Like an auto-shape, a cell has a text-frame and can contain arbitrary text
divided into paragraphs and runs. Any desired character formatting can be
applied individually to each run.

Often however, cell text is just a simple string. For these cases the
read/write :attr:`._Cell.text` property can be the quickest way to set cell
contents.


Merging cells
-------------

A merged cell is produced by specifying two diagonal cells. The merged cell
will occupy all the grid cells in the rectangular region specified by that
diagonal:

.. image:: /_static/img/table-05.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 60%

::

    >>> cell = table.cell(0, 0)
    >>> other_cell = table.cell(1, 1)
    >>> cell.is_merge_origin
    False
    >>> cell.merge(other_cell)
    >>> cell.is_merge_origin
    True
    >>> cell.is_spanned
    False
    >>> other_cell.is_spanned
    True
    >>> table.cell(0, 1).is_spanned
    True

.. image:: /_static/img/table-06.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 60%

A few things to observe:

* The merged cell appears as a single cell occupying the space formerly
  occupied by the other grid cells in the specified rectangular region.

* The formatting of the merged cell (background color, font etc.) is taken
  from the merge origin cell, the top-left cell of the table in this case.

* Content from the merged cells was migrated to the merge-origin cell. That
  content is no longer present in the spanned grid cells (although you can't
  see those at the moment). The content of each cell appears as a separate
  paragraph in the merged cell; it isn't concatenated into a single
  paragraph. Content is migrated in left-to-right, top-to-bottom order of the
  original cells.

* Calling :attr:`other_cell.merge(cell)` would have the exact same effect. The
  merge origin is always the top-left cell in the specified rectangular
  region. There are four distinct ways to specify a given rectangular region
  (two diagonals, each having two orderings).


Un-merging a cell
-----------------

A merged cell can be restored to its underlying grid cells by calling the
:meth:`~._Cell.split` method on its merge-origin cell. Calling
:meth:`~._Cell.split()` on a cell that is not a merge-origin raises
|ValueError|::

    >>> cell = table.cell(0, 0)
    >>> cell.is_merge_origin
    True
    >>> cell.split()
    >>> cell.is_merge_origin
    False
    >>> table.cell(0, 1).is_spanned
    False

.. image:: /_static/img/table-07.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 60%

Note that the content migration performed as part of the `.merge()` operation
was not reversed.


A few snippets that might be handy
----------------------------------

Use Case: Interrogate table for merged cells::

    def iter_merge_origins(table):
        """Generate each merge-origin cell in *table*.

        Cell objects are ordered by their position in the table,
        left-to-right, top-to-bottom.
        """
        return (cell for cell in table.iter_cells() if cell.is_merge_origin)

    def merged_cell_report(cell):
        """Return str summarizing position and size of merged *cell*."""
        return (
            'merged cell at row %d, col %d, %d cells high and %d cells wide'
            % (cell.row_idx, cell.col_idx, cell.span_height, cell.span_width)
        )

    # ---Print a summary line for each merged cell in *table*.---
    for merge_origin_cell in iter_merge_origins(table):
        print(merged_cell_report(merge_origin_cell))

prints a report like::

    merged cell at row 0, col 0, 2 cells high and 2 cells wide
    merged cell at row 3, col 2, 1 cells high and 2 cells wide
    merged cell at row 4, col 0, 2 cells high and 1 cells wide

Use Case: Access only cells that display text (are not spanned)::

    def iter_visible_cells(table):
        return (cell for cell in table.iter_cells() if not cell.is_spanned)

Use Case: Determine whether table contains merged cells::

    def has_merged_cells(table):
        for cell in table.iter_cells():
            if cell.is_merge_origin:
                return True
        return False
